A summary of the algorithm is provided below. Before
starting, the width of the probe, the depth setting and the
side of needle insertion (left or right) is used to determine
the maximum range of possible needle angles. This range
limits the region of interest (ROI) to perform the search.
The gauge of the needle is also assumed to be known.

1. Choose a rough approximation of the needle’s axis
line in the ultrasound image based on the expected
trajectory and define a rectangular ROI.

2. Cast a multitude of rays perpendicular to the approximate needle line within the ROI. These rays should
cross the needle shaft at roughly right angles. The
approximate needle axis, ROI, and perpendicular
rays are shown in Fig. 1.

3. For each pixel along each ray, calculate the average
pixel intensity among that pixel and a line of neighboring pixels parallel to the approximate needle line.
The neighborhood of pixels is shown in Fig. 2. This
step filters out noise and any bright features that
are not part of a line running roughly parallel to
the approximate needle line.

4. For each pixel along each ray, calculate the linear
derivative along the ray of the averaged pixel intensities. We use the simplest approximation for the derivative using the following equation,
d/dn * i[n] = i[n+1] - i[n]; 
where i[n] is the averaged pixel intensity of the nth
pixel along the ray.
This is the edge-detection step. Sharp edges in the
ultrasound image that are crossed by the rays will
appear as peaks. The first side of the needle shaft
crossed by the ray will produce a positive peak and
the second side will produce a negative peak. Indeed,
this approximation to the derivative results in a noisy
derivative profile but subsequent steps have the effect
of averaging this data.

5. Traverse each ray looking at a window of derivative
values along the ray, and search for a derivative profile across the window that matches that of the needle. The size of the window is a parameter which is
set to approximately the width of the needle as it
appears in the ultrasound image. Fig. 3 shows derivative values along a ray and the window positioned
over a needle-like derivative profile. Moving along
each ray in increments of one pixel, compute the
value of score using the following equation,

score = Slag - Slead - |Slag + Slead|; 

where Slead is the sum of the derivative values in the
leading half of the window and Slag is sum of the
derivative values in the lagging half of the window,
as shown in Fig. 3. The summing of derivative values
within the window-halves filters the noise generated
by the derivative performed in the previous step.
When the window is centered on the needle shaft, Slag
will be large and positive and Slead will be large and
negative resulting in a large positive score. All other
derivative profiles will result in a lower (more negative) score. The |Slag + Slead| term penalizes the score
if Slag and Slead are not approximately equivalent in
magnitude, i.e., if we have a sharp edge but not a
finite width needle.
For the window position that produced the highest
score along each ray, record the position of the pixel
at the window center. This is the best guess at where
the needle shaft crosses each ray.

6. Project all the points from the previous step along the
approximate needle line and accumulate their score
values in an array of bins that span the width of
the ROI. The bin location with the highest accumulated score defines the strongest linear feature parallel
to the approximate needle line of this iteration. Fig. 4
shows the projection step and the score histogram.
This is the line detection technique derived from the
Hough transform.
Because we are quantizing the needle point positions
into bins, we smooth the accumulated bin scores by
adding the current pixel’s score to the appropriate
bin and half that score to each of its neighboring bins.
This prevents a strong linear feature from beingmissed if it lies on the boundary between two bins
causing its scores to be split between the two.

7. Rotate the initial linear approximation of the needle by a small angular increment and repeat steps
2–7 until the angular search range has been
exhausted. Record the set of data points for the
iteration that produced the largest accumulated
bin score. The line parallel to the approximate needle line for that iteration that passes through the
highest scoring bin position defines the best linear
guess for the needle.

8. Reject points whose distance from the best linear
guess exceeds a threshold value. We want to include
all the points that contributed to the largest peak in
the bin scores and reject those points that form a part
of other image features.

9. Fit the remaining points to a polynomial equation
using a polynomial least squares regression.

10. Define the tip of the needle using the deepest detected
point. Fig. 5 shows the best linear representation of
the needle, the point rejection thresholds, and the final
polynomial representation of the needle up to the tip.
